28 January 2014
Time is frozen while I attempt a repair caused by a player using a broken function.
--Please do not use functions that I have already said are broken.
--Unless it has been posted that a fix has been applied, they are still broken.

26 January 2014
"New Round" has been iniated... and it marks a new day for NEctroverse.
This map was generated while the server was still running, no reboot was required.
Empire politics will be getting a workup shortly it's been idle long enough.

25 January 2014
Well, time frozen already... I did not expect that.
Time will remain frozen untill I complete the End of Round function.

18 January 2014
Unit Upkeep has changed, traveling units now incur a 50% increase in upkeep.
While units stationed on a planet will incur a 25% increase.

15 January 2014
This is PRE-ALPHA TEST... This is NOT a real round, this is NOT the end design of the game.
This is mearly to help me find the stray bugs from the develeopment of the game core.
By playing you agree to report any faults encountered to the best of your ability.
<br>
Due to an unforseen colission in the databases I've been forced to reset the whole thing.

11 January 2014
Population upeek reduction has been relabled Population reduction, and now allows off-set of portal and unit costs.
You are still unable to make a "profit" from population, but this will change things a bit anyway.<br>
Exploration costs have also changed, Exploration ships in your main fleet no longer count towards costs.
This means that inital exploration costs will be reduced, but the penalty for "Hovering" will still apply.

10 January 2014
Registration for pre-alpha debugging is enabled, but be advised that NO RECORDS will be preserved.
If you register now, you are only doing so to test the system. ::angel

10 January 2014
Redirects modofied, they are no longer controlled by the "Ticker" as this proved ineffective. ::bad
They are now controlled by HTTP Redirect Headers, and therefore may not work on older browsers (if there are any left now days)

9 January 2014
Redirects on this site are contolled by the AJAX Ticker which is controlled by tick speed.
It may take untill the next tick for them to occur, and they will still take place if you manually change pages.

7 January 2014
Large over-haul of structure in progress, many buffers have been converted to dynamic.
The way the server loads its settings has also changed drasticly, hopefully consuming less memory. ::good

5 January 2014
Facebook base link almost completed, this will enable login/registration from FB account.
I have to write the interface from scratch, because some of what I'm doing "isn't possible" :P
And I have found no existing API's for Plain C, so teething issues are to be expected.

29 December 2013
Population growth formula changed, its now based on existing population... so the larger it gets the faster it grows.

18 November 2013
Homeless again. Everything suspended... see you all again when I can :(

15 November 2013
Well, that was epic... The server has now been upgraded to full HTTP/1.1 support.
Hopefully you will all see it paying off with improved load/responce times :)

12 November 2013
<div class="center"><i>All Function development placed on hold, Alpha stage postponed.
Upgrade from HTTP/1.0 to HTTP/1.1 in progress. Nothing changes untill this is finished.<br>
What is HTTP/1.1, and Why is it needed? -- Simply put, its majorly superiour in many ways.
First and foremost, a connection with HTTP/1.0 must close and re-open with every transmission.
With HTTP/1.1 a connection stays open untill it is no longer needed, therfore much more efficent.</i></div>

22nd October 2013
Coming soon... NEctroverse Alpha!
Registration is currently disabled, due to pre-alpha stage.

18th October 2013
NEctroverse is coming back...
When... well, I'm not exactly sure yet. I'm still recoding quite a few things.

...Gone
Oops, I deleted the previous entries... that was before I made this new "full list" page. ::fool
